Prepare for 12.0.0-alpha.0 (#5600)
realm/realm-js: CHANGELOG.md

## 12.0.0-alpha.0 (2023-03-21)

This is the first pre-release of the next major version of our SDK.
Please read more and discuss in the dedicated discussion: https://github.com/realm/realm-js/discussions/5416

### Breaking changes

> Although this is a complete re-write of our SDK, we've strived to keep breakages to a minimum and expect our users to upgrade from v11 without any notible changes to their code-base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this is a complete rewrite of our SDK, we've strived to keep breakages to a minimum and expect our users to upgrade from v11 without any notable changes to their code-base.
```

However, is this really true? Aren't we listing some notable changes that users will need to make? Perhaps we should say "significant" rather than "notable"?

* In an effort to align with EcmaScript modules, we’re adopting a pattern of named exports on the “root” of the package namespace. This change also affects how our library is imported on CommonJS / Node.js: Before, we exported our constructor directly from the package (`module.export = Realm` style), which would allow CommonJS runtimes like Node.js to import us using a simple assignment:
```javascript
const Realm = require(“realm”); // this commonjs style - won’t work anymore

> From now on, users need to consume us using a named import, like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// From now on, users need to consume us using a named import, like this:
```

Reviewer 3: or end the code block and start another after the comment

const { Realm } = require(“realm”); // commonjs style
import { Realm } from “realm”; // esm style
import Realm from “realm”; // esm style - consuming our “default” export
```

> * Similarly we’re deprecating our namespaced API (the long chaining of identifiers, such as Realm.App.Sync.setLogLevel) in favor of the shorter named exports. Our main motivation is that it has proven very verbose and hard to maintain in our new SDK and since its inception (which predates ES Modules), we believe the community has moved towards a preference for simple named exports. We would love your feedback on this decision - please comment on the discussion linked above 👆

Reviewer 4: A) in the note in the top of the change log entry. I could clarify that with a link here as well.
B) It predates TS namespaces too. I'll clarify.

> * The entire BSON package used to be re-exported as Realm.BSON, to simplify the new SDK we want to export only the BSON types that our SDK database component supports (ObjectId, Decimal128 and UUID). See #4934.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The entire BSON package used to be re-exported as Realm.BSON, to simplify the new SDK we want to export only the BSON types that our SDK database component supports (ObjectId, Decimal128 and UUID). See [#4934](https://github.com/realm/realm-js/issues/4934).
```
This didn't resolve to a link in the file viewer

> * We're now reusing code to perform assertions and although this is strictly not a breaking change, since we havn't historically documented error messages, you should probably revisit any code in your app which relies on matching on specific error messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We're now reusing code to perform assertions and although this is strictly not a breaking change, since we haven't historically documented error messages, you should probably revisit any code in your app which relies on matching on specific error messages.
```

> * `Results`, `List` and `Set` used to inherit directly from `Collection` but now inherits from an abstract `OrderedCollection`, which interns extends `Collection`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `Results`, `List` and `Set` used to inherit directly from `Collection` but now inherits from an abstract `OrderedCollection`, which internally extends `Collection`.
```

> * `Results`, `List` and `Set` used to inherit directly from `Collection` but now inherits from an abstract `OrderedCollection`, which interns extends `Collection`.

Reviewer 5: Remove "interns"

> * `Results`, `List` and `Set` used to inherit directly from `Collection` but now inherits from an abstract `OrderedCollection`, which interns extends `Collection`.

Reviewer 4: I don't think they are 🤔 There might be some situations where users want some function to take anything ordered and would want to use those types. If we considered them internal we shouldn't export them.

> * `Results`, `List` and `Set` used to inherit directly from `Collection` but now inherits from an abstract `OrderedCollection`, which interns extends `Collection`.

Reviewer: What use case is there for users depending on the realm-specific `OrderedCollection` type? If they want "anything ordered", they are probably also fine with a plain JS array. I would expect most users to be better served with either `ReadOnlyArray<T>` or even `Iterable<T>` if they only need iteration.

> * Users will no longer be able to mix declaring schemas using a shorthand (string) (ex “object[]” for a list of objects) and declaring an “objectType” in their schema. They have to choose one and stick with it for every property. This is a minor breaking change since this used to be allowed:

Reviewer 4: I tried to clarify this:

* Users will no longer be able to declare schemas using a shorthand (string) (ex "object[]" for a list of objects) when using an object to declare their schema. Per property, you have to choose either a shorthand string or an object with a non-shorthand `type`. This is a minor breaking change since this used to be allowed:
```js
{ type: "object[]", objectType: "SomeObject" } // No longer works
{ type: "list", objectType: "SomeObject" } // This still works
```

> * Users will no longer be able to mix declaring schemas using a shorthand (string) (ex “object[]” for a list of objects) and declaring an “objectType” in their schema. They have to choose one and stick with it for every property. This is a minor breaking change since this used to be allowed:

Reviewer 4: Or actually - I choose LJ's proposal instead.

```js
{ type: "object[]", objectType: "SomeObject" } // No longer works
{ type: "list", objectType: "SomeObject" } // This still works
```

> * To prevent modifying end-users class-based model classes, we’re now wrapping class-based models in our own model. This is technically not a breaking change, as the previous behavior was undocumented and while objects will still pass `instanceof SomeClass` checks, code who is testing using prototype comparisons will fail:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To prevent modifying end-users class-based model classes, we’re now wrapping class-based models in our own model. This is technically not a breaking change, as the previous behavior was undocumented and while objects will still pass `instanceof SomeClass` checks, code that is testing using prototype comparisons will fail:
```

```js
Object.getPrototypeOf(object) == CustomObject.prototype // No longer works
```

> * It used to be the case that Symbols got type coerced to string when used as keys into a dictionary, this is undocumented behaviour that we were testing for which makes little sense in practice, hence won’t be implemented in the new SDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It used to be the case that Symbols got type coerced to string when used as keys into a dictionary. This is undocumented behaviour that we were testing for which makes little sense in practice and hence won’t be implemented in the new SDK.
```

Reviewer 3: > we suggest deprecating
we _suggest_ or we _are_? I assume we have already done something and have a default choice?

Reviewer 4: I opted for Mathias' suggestion.

> * It used to be the case that Symbols got type coerced to string when used as keys into a dictionary, this is undocumented behaviour that we were testing for which makes little sense in practice, hence won’t be implemented in the new SDK.

Reviewer 4: I've created https://github.com/realm/realm-js/issues/5604 to track that.

> * As a part of migrating to NAPI (since ~ v6), we saw no performant way to support getting property names of a Realm.Object via the standard Object.keys(obj). As a side-effect we stopped supporting the object spread operator `{...obj}` and `Realm.Object#keys()`, `Realm.Object#entries()` and `Realm.Object#toJSON()` methods were introduced as a workaround. The new SDK wraps its accessor objects in a Proxy trapping the ownKeys trap which enables calls to the standard `Object.keys(obj)` and the spread operator `{...obj}` and therefore we suggest deprecating the API with the @deprecation (plus console.warn once) of RealmObject#keys() and RealmObject#entries(). RealmObject#toJSON still serves the purpose of producing a circularly referencing object graph. We would love the community's feedback on this!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As a part of migrating to NAPI (since ~ v6), we saw no performant way to support getting property names of a Realm.Object via the standard Object.keys(obj). As a side-effect we stopped supporting the object spread operator `{...obj}` and `Realm.Object#keys()`, `Realm.Object#entries()` and `Realm.Object#toJSON()` methods were introduced as a workaround. The new SDK wraps its accessor objects in a Proxy trapping the ownKeys trap which enables calls to the standard `Object.keys(obj)` and the spread operator `{...obj}`. Therefore, we are deprecating the API with the @deprecation flag and a single console.warn of RealmObject#keys() and RealmObject#entries(). RealmObject#toJSON still serves the purpose of producing a circularly referencing object graph. We would love the community's feedback on this!
```

Reviewer 4: I've created https://github.com/realm/realm-js/issues/5605 to track the actual deprecation as I'm actually unsure if we ever did that.

> * As a part of migrating to NAPI (since ~ v6), we saw no performant way to support getting property names of a Realm.Object via the standard Object.keys(obj). As a side-effect we stopped supporting the object spread operator `{...obj}` and `Realm.Object#keys()`, `Realm.Object#entries()` and `Realm.Object#toJSON()` methods were introduced as a workaround. The new SDK wraps its accessor objects in a Proxy trapping the ownKeys trap which enables calls to the standard `Object.keys(obj)` and the spread operator `{...obj}` and therefore we suggest deprecating the API with the @deprecation (plus console.warn once) of RealmObject#keys() and RealmObject#entries(). RealmObject#toJSON still serves the purpose of producing a circularly referencing object graph. We would love the community's feedback on this!

Reviewer 4: It was a copy-paste mistake. The technical design was written as a proposal.

> * The [push service is deprecated](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/reference/push-notifications/) from the servers point of view, we've deprecated this on v11 and removed it from v12.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The [push service is deprecated](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/app-services/reference/push-notifications/) from the servers point of view. We've deprecated this on v11 and removed it from v12.
```

> * We’ve decided to remove numeric indexing and “array methods” from the SubscriptionSet, since it was would bloat our SDK code, the team see little actual use-case for it, we expect very few developers actually using this and the workaround is really easy (spreading into an array `[...subscriptions]`). Again something we would love feedback on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We’ve decided to remove numeric indexing and “array methods” from the `SubscriptionSet`, since it would bloat our SDK code, the team saw little actual use-case for it, we expect very few developers were actually using this and the workaround is really easy to implement (spreading into an array `[...subscriptions]`). Again something we would love feedback on.
```

> * We’ve decided to remove numeric indexing and “array methods” from the SubscriptionSet, since it was would bloat our SDK code, the team see little actual use-case for it, we expect very few developers actually using this and the workaround is really easy (spreading into an array `[...subscriptions]`). Again something we would love feedback on.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* We’ve decided to remove numeric indexing and “array methods” from the SubscriptionSet, since it was would bloat our SDK code, the team sees little actual use-case for it, we expect very few developers actually using this and the workaround is really easy (spreading into an array `[...subscriptions]`). Again something we would love feedback on.
```

> * We’ve decided to remove numeric indexing and “array methods” from the SubscriptionSet, since it was would bloat our SDK code, the team see little actual use-case for it, we expect very few developers actually using this and the workaround is really easy (spreading into an array `[...subscriptions]`). Again something we would love feedback on.

Reviewer 6: Building on top of Andrew's and Kenneth's suggestions.
(I removed the `we expect very few developers..` since it seems similar to `the team sees little actual use-case..`)
```suggestion
* We’ve decided to remove numeric indexing and “array methods” from the SubscriptionSet, since (a) the team sees little actual use-case for it, (b) it would bloat our SDK code, and (c) there is a simple workaround if needed (spreading into an array `[...realm.subscriptions]`). (The property `length` is available.) Again, something we would love feedback on.
```

> * No longer exporting the `ObjectPropsType`, `UserMap`, `UserType`, `BaseFunctionsFactory`, `AuthProviders`, `PropertyType`, `HTTP`, `*Details` interfaces of the `EmailPasswordAuthClient` and `AuthError` types, since it wasn’t used internally, not expected to be used by users and most are very simple to type out for any user relying on it. Similarly the `DictionaryBase` is a type that was introduced to help work around an issue (declaring string index accessors on a class with methods) in our declarations. We consider it an internal detail that got introduced as part of our public API by accident. We propose removing this and ask users to simply use the `Dictionary` type directly. We also decided to rename the `Session` class to `SyncSession` since it’s now exported directly on the package namespace. `Session` will still be available (but deprecated) on the `Realm.Sync.Session`. We’re no longer using the `*Payload` types (were actually only used by Realm Web) and we don’t expect end-users to be relying directly on these, hence they will be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No longer exporting the `ObjectPropsType`, `UserMap`, `UserType`, `BaseFunctionsFactory`, `AuthProviders`, `PropertyType`, `HTTP`, `*Details` interfaces of the `EmailPasswordAuthClient` and `AuthError` types, since it wasn’t used internally, not expected to be used by users and most are very simple to type out for any user relying on it. Similarly the `DictionaryBase` is a type that was introduced to help work around an issue (declaring string index accessors on a class with methods) in our declarations. We consider it an internal detail that got introduced as part of our public API by accident. We propose removing this and ask users to simply use the `Dictionary` type directly. We also decided to rename the `Session` class to `SyncSession` since it’s now exported directly on the package namespace. `Session` will still be available (but deprecated) as `Realm.Sync.Session`. We’re no longer using the `*Payload` types (they were only used by Realm Web) and we don’t expect end-users to be relying directly on these, hence they will be deleted.
```

> We propose removing

That doesn't sound right. Who are we proposing this to? Our users? Maybe use "We are considering" or "We are planning on" depending on what you are trying to say here.

Reviewer 4: It was a copy paste slip through, the technical design was written more as a proposal.

> * The return values of Object#getPropertyType was changed to return `"list"` instead of `"array"`.

Reviewer: Do you want to use `RealmList` or at least `List` (capital L) here? Ditto for `RealmObject` or `Realm.Object`, since `Object` seems ambiguous.

Reviewer 4: No. It's returns strings similar to those the schema parser takes.

### Enhancements

> * The new SDK wraps its accessor objects in a Proxy trapping the ownKeys trap which enables calls to the standard `Object.keys(obj)` and the spread operator `{...obj}`

Reviewer 2: Do we still have a spread operator issue open?  If so, this would probably be a good place to link it.

Reviewer 4: Great idea - I've added those.

> * The new SDK wraps its accessor objects in a Proxy trapping the ownKeys trap which enables calls to the standard `Object.keys(obj)` and the spread operator `{...obj}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The new SDK supports operations like `Object.keys(obj)` and the spread operator `{...obj}` on `RealmObject`s
```

The `Proxy` usage is an internal implementation detail. We should only say what is supported, not how we did so.

We may also want to include a note like "We still recommend explicitly only accessing the fields you need rather than using spreads. Spreads eagerly access all fields in the object, which can have significant performance costs if some fields are not actually needed."

> * Added configuration option `SyncConfiguration.cancelWaitsOnNonFatalError`. Set to true, all async operations (such as opening the Realm with `Realm.open`) will fail when a non-fatal error, such as a timeout, occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added configuration option `SyncConfiguration.cancelWaitsOnNonFatalError`, which defaults to false. When set to true, all async operations (such as opening the Realm with `Realm.open`) will fail when a non-fatal error, such as a timeout, occurs.
```

I assumed the default based on the phrasing here, without actually checking. Please fix if I guessed wrongly.

> * Added an overload to `Object.linkingObjects` method that takes type of the linking object as an input instead of its string name ([#5326](https://github.com/realm/realm-js/issues/5326))  

Reviewer: Can we go through the whole document and pick a consistent way to refer to `Realm.Object` (or `RealmObject`, or `realm.Object`, ...)? I don't think we should use unqualified `Object` since that clashes with the js `Object` constructor object. We probably should consider renaming it in our own code as well for the same reason.

Reviewer 4: It's called `RealmObject` in our own code, except before the final export for backwards compatibility (and because it's shorter).

> * File format: generates Realms with format v23 (reads and upgrades file format v5 or later for non-synced Realm, upgrades file format v10 or later for synced Realms).

Reviewer: It won't let me comment on the above lines, but there are some issues. 

* [ ] don't we depend on RN >= 0.71.something?
* [ ] remove the dummy line in Fixed (or actually fill it in with some of the bugs we think we fixed...)
